Alan Turing and 
Bletchley Park 
Charles Severance 
University of Michigan 
This month marks the 100th anniversary of Alan Turing’s birth. 
His ground-breaking work in the 1940s continues to have an 
impact on computer science as we know it. 

modern computer science. 
many to be the father of 
Multiple foundational notions 
in the field—the Turing test, Turing 
machine, Turing completeness, and 
Church-Turing computability—bear 
his name in acknowledgment of his 
early breakthroughs and influence. 
It’s rare that a single genius, work- 
ing alone, can achieve one great 
breakthrough, let alone several of 
them. For the sake of simplicity, his- 
torical accounts often remove the 
details of the rich contexts that create 
the necessary preconditions for such 
breakthroughs. But our institutions, 
colleagues, students, and even the 
people we have lunch with form a 
context within which we all operate. 
Here, the focus is less on the detail 
of Turing’s particular accomplish- 
ments throughout his career, instead 
examining some of the context in 
which he achieved his accomplish- 
ments. The video associated with 
this article (www.computer.org/ 
computingconversations) explores 
some of the activities at Bletchley 
Park, where Turing did some of his 
greatest work—in particular, it looks 
at how Turing was deeply connected 
to many other brilliant people during 
and after his time there. 
Figure 1 offers an overview of 
Turing’s connection to the work done 
at Bletchley Park during World War II. 
EARLY YEARS AND THE 
SECOND WORLD WAR 
Turing graduated from Princeton 
in 1938, where he had already proved 
to be an amazing talent who thought 
deeply about many topics. After he 
received his PhD, he returned to Cam- 
bridge and started working part time 
for the Government Code and Cipher 
School at Bletchley Park. When Brit- 
ain declared war on Germany in 1939, 
Turing reported full-time to Bletchley 
Park and began working on breaking 
the various cryptography techniques 
used by Germany during World War II. 
Because the stakes were so high 
for Britain, Bletchley Park was a well- 
funded operation with more than 
10,000 people working at peak capac- 
ity, representing a diverse mix of 
mathematicians, engineers, linguists, 
and experts in other fields. Women 
made up two-thirds of its workforce. 
Bletchley Park was the ideal place 
to come up with a theory and watch 
literally hundreds of people adjust and 
refine it to get it into production as 
quickly as possible. Being surrounded 
by adequate resources and knowing 
that if you solve the problems you face 
you’ll save thousands of lives generates 
an intensely creative environment. 
The systems developed at Bletch- 
ley Park needed to break encrypted 
messages using whatever technol- 
ogy was available. The decryption 
devices combined mechanical and 
electronic computation, but as the 
war progressed and the cryptog- 
raphy techniques became more 
sophisticated, the need for faster com- 
putations pushed scientists from the 
primarily mechanical computations 
of the BOMBE toward the electronic 
computations of the Colossus. 

At the beginning of World War II, 
the Germans were able to move troops 
and other resources very quickly by 
coordinating those movements using 
wireless communications. Because 
their enemies could monitor wireless 
communications, it was necessary to 
encrypt any text before it was sent. 
The Enigma was one of several 
machines used to encrypt messages 
before they were sent in Morse code. 
It used moving wheels with internal 
electrical connections as well as a plug 
board to make it virtually impossible 
to read the scrambled text without 
knowing the choice of the encryption 
wheels’ initial settings and plug con- 





nections. Each day, all the Engima 
operators for a particular communica- 
tion network used a different machine 
setup known as a key. If the operator 
could determine the key using one 
message on a particular day on a par- 
ticular network, it was a simple matter 
to decrypt all messages sent by opera- 
tors on that network for that day. 
Alan Turing designed a machine at 
Bletchley Park called the BOMBE that 
would mechanically help determine 
the daily key used by a particular 
group of Enigma operators by trying 
many different possible key com- 
binations very quickly. The BOMBE 
had its roots in the BOMBA, an ear- 
lier mechanical code-breaking device 
developed in Poland by Marian 
Rejewski, Jerzy Róz˙ ycki, and Henryk 
Zygalski of the Polish Cypher Bureau. 
The Polish team shared the design 
with Turing and others at Bletchley 
Park five weeks before the German 
invasion of their country in 1939. As 
described by Paul Kellar of Bletchley 
Park, 







The Polish approach to breaking 
the Enigma depended on the way the 
message header was added at the 
beginning of each message. But in 
early May 1940, the Germans changed 
their method for adding headers. 
Turing’s solution was based on the 
fact that many military messages are 
routine and use identical phrases day 
after day, such as “Nothing to report” 
or “Weather forecast for today is …” 
If the researchers had the encrypted 
text and the guessed plaintext (the 
“crib”), it was only a matter of time 
before they could compute the wheel 
settings used to encrypt the message. 
The BOMBE was a mechanical 
device that simulated 36 Enigmas, 
repeatedly testing possible settings 
for the wheels and stopping when it 
found a possible correct setting. More 
than 200 BOMBE machines were built 
for use at Bletchley Park. 
Although Turing designed the 
BOMBE’s algorithm, the machine was 
engineered and built by a team at the 
British Tabulating Machine Company, 
led by Harold (Doc) Keen. Gordon 
Welchman, also from Cambridge, 
added the Diagonal Board concept, 
which dramatically reduced the 
number of random or incorrect stops. 
All in all, developing the BOMBE was 
very much a team effort. 

Later in the war, Germany started 
using much more sophisticated 
encryption devices, including the 
Lorenz SZ42. The SZ42 had 12 wheels 
and sent encrypted data using five-bit 
teleprinter codes rather than Morse 
code. Hitler and his generals used it 
for longer, more strategic messages. 
Manual decryption of a single mes- 
sage took nearly six weeks, so the 
Allies needed an automated solution. 
Turing was involved in developing 
some of the approaches used to crack 
new messages encoded with the SZ42, 
but he wasn’t involved in the Colossus 
computer’s development. 
There was no possible way to build 
a mechanical code-breaking machine 
for this new encryption technique, so 
engineers at Bletchley Park started 
building electronic computers to 
implement faster code-breaking 
algorithms. After testing an earlier 
version (the Mark I), the Colossus 
Mark II emerged—it could help break 
an encrypted high-command mes- 
sage in roughly six hours. The first 
Colossus Mark II was up and running 
at Bletchley Park on 1 June 1944 and 
helped decrypt strategic traffic in 
time to inform the D-Day invasion on 
6 June 1944. 
Tommy Flowers, a telecommuni- 
cations engineer with the British Post 
Office, built the Colossus. According to 
Kevin Murrell of the National Museum 
of Computing at Bletchley Park: 










Figure 1. From Polish Bomba to the birth of the digital age: Alan Turing’s work at 
Bletchley Park. Artist’s rendering by Matt Pinter. 
 







Ultimately, the engineers at the 
British Post Office built 10 Colossus 
computers, and they were never 
powered off except when there was 
a failure. Using this technique, the 
valves turned out to be quite reliable, 
and some of the vacuum tubes in 
the rebuilt Colossus machine that 
runs today at the National Museum 
of Computing at Bletchley Park date 
back to the 1940s. 

All of the technology developed at 
Bletchley Park remained top secret 
long after the war. But the knowledge 
that it was possible to build a fast, reli- 
able electronic computer remained in 
the minds of those who had worked 
on the technology. According to Joel 
Greenberg of Bletchley Park, 


















Interestingly, the time pressures 
of immediate wartime needs at 
Bletchley Park kept Turing and his 
colleagues from building more gen- 
eral-purpose computers, but it also 
meant that they could afford to take 
big risks on untried technologies, 
decide to try more than one approach 
simultaneously, and quickly work out 
the engineering details on new tech- 
nologies. Once the war was over and 
the pressure was off, Turing, Welch- 
man, Newman, and others went back 
into academia; with more time to 
reflect, they adapted electronic tech- 
nologies to build general-purpose 
electronic computers. 

As a computer scientist, you owe it 
to yourself to visit Bletchley Park; it’s 
a necessary pilgrimage that helps you 
fully understand the foundations of 
our field. What’s particularly striking 
is the juxtaposition of the BOMBE 
as a highly developed mechanical 
computing device and the first 
generation of electronic computing 
machines in the form of the Colossus. 
Between the two devices, you can see 
the seeds of the electronic computing 
age. It’s like comparing a highly 
refined horse-drawn carriage to the 
earliest automobile. 
One of the goals of Bletchley Park’s 
curators is to make sure the historical 
systems actually run. When you visit, 
you can see and feel a rebuilt BOMBE 
actually running; the Colossus is in 
daily production as if it were still 
World War II. As you walk by it, 
you can watch and hear paper tape 
whizzing by at 30 miles per hour and 
feel the heat radiating from the tubes. 
Until you can visit in person, watch 
the video of my visit to Bletchley Park 
and the National Museum of Comput- 
ing. I got an up close and personal 
tour of a running BOMBE and Colos- 
sus and spent some time in Alan 
Turing’s office in Hut 8. 

most brilliant mathematicians 
at Bletchley Park during World 
War II. He designed or influenced 
virtually every technology developed 
there, and whenever a new challenge 
presented itself, he threw himself into 
finding a solution. 
However, Turing wouldn’t have 
progressed as quickly as he did 
without the help of other math- 
ematicians, linguists, scientists, and 
engineers who could quickly vali- 
date his ideas and improve on them, 
and then build hardware that put the 
ideas into successful production. The 
quick turnaround on each idea and 
the need to solve increasingly com- 
plex cryptanalysis problems moved 
computational thinking forward very 
quickly during that time period. 
Sometimes, Turing was at the 
center of the design of something 
like the BOMBE and at other times, 
he was on the periphery, such as in 
the Colossus’s development. As Joel 
Greenberg says, 







The fact that Turing never had to 
worry about funding his research or 
even publishing the results in journals 
(since they were top secret) let him 
focus on moving his thinking forward 
as quickly as possible, unfettered 
with academic minutiae—at least 
during his years at Bletchley Park. 

I thank the Bletchley Park Trust, 
the National Museum of Computing, 
Joel Greenberg, Paul Kellar, and Kevin 
Murrell; I also greatly appreciate the 
insightful comments from the review- 
ers of the video and article. 
Charles Severance, Comput ing 
Conversations column editor and 
Computer’s multimedia editor, is 
a clinical associate professor and 
teaches in the School of Information 
at the University of Michigan. You can 
follow him on Twitter @drchuck or 
contact him at csev@umich.edu. 



 
